# Chapter 12 Why Write Comments? The Four Excuses

In-code documentation plays a crucial role in software design. Comments are essential to help developers understand a system and work efficiently, but the role of comments goes beyond this. Documentation also plays an important role in abstraction; without comments, you can’t hide complexity. Finally, the process of writing comments, if done correctly, will actually improve a system’s design. Conversely, a good software design loses much of its value if it is poorly documented.

Unfortunately, this view is not universally shared. A significant fraction of production code contains essentially no comments. Many developers think that comments are a waste of time; others see the value in comments, but somehow never get around to writing them. Fortunately, many development teams recognize the value of documentation, and it feels like the prevalence of these teams is gradually increasing. However, even in teams that encourage documentation, comments are often viewed as drudge work and many developers don’t understand how to write them, so the resulting documentation is often mediocre. Inadequate documentation creates a huge and unnecessary drag on software development.

In this chapter I will discuss the excuses developers use to avoid writing comments, and the reasons why comments really do matter. Chapter 13 will then describe how to write good comments and the next few chapters after that will discuss related issues such as choosing variable names and how to use documentation to improve a system’s design. I hope these chapters will convince you of three things: good comments can make a big difference in the overall quality of software; it isn’t hard to write good comments; and (this may be hard to believe) writing comments can actually be fun.

When developers don’t write comments, they usually justify their behavior with one or more of the following excuses:

- “Good code is self-documenting.”
- “I don’t have time to write comments.”
- “Comments get out of date and become misleading.”
- “The comments I have seen are all worthless; why bother?” In the sections below I will address each of these excuses in turn.

## 12.1 Good code is self-documenting

## 12.2 I don’t have time to write comments

## 12.3 Comments get out of date and become misleading

## 12.4 All the comments I have seen are worthless

## 12.5 Benefits of well-written comments

## 12.6 A different opinion: comments are failures

In his book Clean Code, Robert Martin takes a more negative view of comments:

> ... comments are, at best, a necessary evil. If our programming languages were expressive enough, or if we had the talent to subtly wield those languages to express our intent, we would not need comments very much — perhaps not at all.

> The proper use of comments is to compensate for our failure to express ourselves in code.... Comments are always failures. We must have them because we can’t always figure out how to express ourselves without them, but their use is not a cause for celebration.

I agree that good software design can reduce the need for comments (particularly those in method bodies). But comments do not represent failures. The information they provide is quite different from that provided by code, and this information can’t be represented in code today. Code and comments are each well-suited to the things they represent and they each provide important benefits; even if the information in comments could somehow be captured in code, it’s unclear that this would be an improvement.

One of the purposes of comments is to make it it unnecessary to read the code: for example, instead of reading the entire body of a method, a developer can read a short interface comment to get all the information they need in order to invoke the method. Martin takes the opposite tack: he advocates replacing comments with code. Instead of writing a comment to explain what is happening in a block of code in a method, Martin suggests pulling that block out into a separate method (with no comments) and using the name of the method as a replacement for the comment. This results in long names such as isLeastRelevantMultipleOfNextLargerPrimeFactor. Even with all these words, names like this are cryptic and provide less information than a well-written comment. And, with this approach, developers end up effectively retyping the documentation for a method every time they invoke it!

I worry that Martin’s philosophy encourages a bad attitude in programmers, where they avoid comments so as not to seem like failures. This could even result in good designers coming under false criticism: “What’s wrong with your code that it requires comments?”

Well-written comments are not failures. They increase the value of code and serve a fundamental role in defining abstractions and managing system complexity.

